# Developing a PhEval Plugin

## Description

Plugin development allows PhEval to be extensible, as we have designed it.
The plugin goal is to be flexible through custom runner implementations. This plugin development enhances the PhEval functionality. You can build one quickly using this step-by-step process.

==_All custom Runners implementations must implement all_ **PhevalRunner** _methods_==

::: src.pheval.runners.runner.PhEvalRunner
    handler: python
    options:
      members:
        - PhEvalRunner
      show_root_heading: false
      show_source: true
---

## Step-by-Step Plugin Development Process

The plugin structure is derived from a [cookiecutter](https://cookiecutter.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) template, [cookiecutter](https://github.com/monarch-initiative/pheval-runner-template), and it uses [MkDocs](https://mkdocstrings.github.io), [tox](https://tox.wiki/en/latest/) and [poetry](https://python-poetry.org) as core dependencies.
This allows PhEval extensibility to be standardised in terms of documentation and dependency management.

### 1. Cookiecutter scaffold

First, install the cruft package. Cruft enables keeping projects up-to-date with future updates made to this original template.

Install the latest release of cruft from pip

```bash
pip install cruft
```

> **_NOTE:_**  You may encounter an error with the naming of the project layout if using an older release of cruft. To avoid this, make sure you have installed the latest release version.

Next, create a project using the cookiecutter template.

```
cruft create https://github.com/monarch-initiative/pheval-runner-template
```

### 2. Further setup

#### Install poetry if you haven't already.

```
pip install poetry
```

#### Install dependencies

```
poetry install
```

#### Run tox to see if the setup works

```
poetry run tox
```

### 3. Implement PhEval Custom Runner

In the project structure generated by Cookiecutter, you'll find `runner.py` located in the `src` directory. This is where you'll define the methods required to develop the plugin. Specifically, you'll implement the prepare, run, and post-process methods, which are essential for executing the pheval run command.
```python
"""Runner."""

from dataclasses import dataclass
from pathlib import Path

from pheval.runners.runner import PhEvalRunner


@dataclass
class CustomRunner(PhEvalRunner):
    """Runner class implementation."""

    input_dir: Path
    testdata_dir: Path
    tmp_dir: Path
    output_dir: Path
    config_file: Path
    version: str

    def prepare(self):
        """Prepare."""
        print("preparing")

    def run(self):
        """Run."""
        print("running")

    def post_process(self):
        """Post Process."""
        print("post processing")

```


The Cookiecutter will automatically populate the plugins section in the `pyproject.toml` file. If you decide to modify the path of `runner.py` or rename its class, be sure to update the corresponding entries in this section accordingly:

```toml
[tool.poetry.plugins."pheval.plugins"]
customrunner = "pheval_plugin_example.runner:CustomRunner"
```

> Please Note that the path here and naming of the class is case-sensitive.


### 4. Implementing PhEval helper methods

Streamlining the creation of your custom PhEval runner can be facilitated by leveraging PhEval's versatile helper methods, where applicable.

Within PhEval, numerous public methods have been designed to assist in your runner methods. The utilisation of these helper methods is optional, yet they are crafted to enhance the overall implementation process.

#### Utility methods

The `PhenopacketUtil` class is designed to aid in the collection of specific data from a Phenopacket.

::: src.pheval.utils.phenopacket_utils.PhenopacketUtil
    handler: python
    options:
      members:
        - PhenopacketUtil
      show_root_heading: false
      show_source: true
---

`PhenopacketUtil` proves particularly beneficial in scenarios where the tool for which you're crafting a runner implementation does not directly accept Phenopackets as inputs. Instead, it might require elements—such as HPO IDs— via the command-line interface (CLI). In this context, leveraging PhenopacketUtil within the runner's preparation phase enables the extraction of observed phenotypic features from the Phenopacket input, facilitating seamless processing.

An example of how this could be implemented is outlined here:

```python
from pheval.utils.phenopacket_utils import phenopacket_reader
from pheval.utils.phenopacket_utils import PhenopacketUtil

phenopacket = phenopacket_reader("/path/to/phenopacket.json")
phenopacket_util = PhenopacketUtil(phenopacket)
# To return a list of all observed phenotypes for a phenopacket
observed_phenotypes = phenopacket_util.observed_phenotypic_features()
# To extract just the HPO ID as a list
observed_phenotypes_hpo_ids = [
    observed_phenotype.type.id for observed_phenotype in observed_phenotypes
]
```
#### Additional tool-specific configurations

For the `pheval run` command to execute successfully, a `config.yaml` should be found within the input directory supplied on the CLI.

```yaml
tool: 
tool_version: 
variant_analysis: 
gene_analysis: 
disease_analysis: 
tool_specific_configuration_options:
```

The `tool_specific_configuration_options` is an optional field that can be populated with any variables specific to your runner implementation that is required for the running of your tool.

All other fields are required to be filled in. The `variant_analysis`, `gene_analysis`, and `disease_analysis` are set as booleans and are for specifying what type of analysis/prioritisation the tool outputs.

To populate the `tool_specific_configurations_options` with customised data, we suggest using the `pydantic` package as it can easily parse the data from the yaml structure.

e.g.,

_Define a `BaseModel` class with the fields that will populate the `tool_specific_configuration_options`_

```python
from pydantic import BaseModel, Field

class CustomisedConfigurations(BaseModel):
    """
    Class for defining the customised configurations in tool_specific_configurations field,
    within the input_dir config.yaml
    Args:
        environment (str): Environment to run
    """
    environment: str = Field(...)
```

_Within your runner parse the field into an object._

```python
from dataclasses import dataclass
from pheval.runners.runner import PhEvalRunner
from pathlib import Path

@dataclass
class CustomPhevalRunner(PhEvalRunner):
    """CustomPhevalRunner Class."""

    input_dir: Path
    testdata_dir: Path
    tmp_dir: Path
    output_dir: Path
    config_file: Path
    version: str

    def prepare(self):
        """prepare method."""
        print("preparing")
        config = CustomisedConfigurations.parse_obj(
            self.input_dir_config.tool_specific_configuration_options
        )
        environment = config.environment
        
    def run(self):
        """run method."""
        print("running with custom pheval runner")

    def post_process(self):
        """post_process method."""
        print("post processing")
        

```

#### Post-processing methods

PhEval currently supports the benchmarking of gene, variant, and disease prioritisation results. 

To benchmark these result types, PhEval parquet result files need to be generated. 

PhEval can deal with the ranking and generation of these files to the correct location. However, the runner implementation must handle the extraction of essential data from the tool-specific raw results. This involves transforming them into a polars dataframe with the required columns for the benchmark type.

The columns representing essential information extracted from tool-specific output for gene, variant, and disease prioritisation are defined as follows:

::: src.pheval.post_processing.validate_result_format.ResultSchema
    handler: python
    options:
      members:
        - GENE_RESULT_SCHEMA
        - VARIANT_RESULT_SCHEMA
        - DISEASE_RESULT_SCHEMA
      show_root_heading: false
      show_source: true
---

The `grouping_id` column is _**optional**_ and is designed to handle cases where entities should be jointly ranked without being penalised. 
For example, in the ranking of compound heterozygous variant which occurs when two or more variants, inherited together, 
contribute to a phenotype. For this purpose, variants that are part of the same compound heterozygous group 
(e.g., within the same gene) should be assigned the same `grouping_id`. 
This ensures they are ranked as a single entity, preserving their combined significance.
Variants that are not part of any compound heterozygous group should each have a unique `grouping_id`. 
This approach prevents any unintended overlap in ranking and ensures that each group or individual variant is accurately represented. 
The use of the `grouping_id` would also be suitable for the ranking and prioritisation of polygenic diseases.

Depending on whether you need to generate gene, variant, and or disease results depends on the final method called to generate the results from the polars dataframe. The methods are outlined below:

::: src.pheval.post_processing.post_processing.generate_gene_result
    handler: python
    options:
      show_root_heading: false
      show_source: true
---

::: src.pheval.post_processing.post_processing.generate_variant_result
    handler: python
    options:
      show_root_heading: false
      show_source: true
---


::: src.pheval.post_processing.post_processing.generate_disease_result
    handler: python
    options:
      show_root_heading: false
      show_source: true
---

An example of how the method can be called is outlined here:

```python
from pheval.post_processing.post_processing import generate_gene_result, SortOrder

generate_gene_result(
    results=pheval_gene_result,  # this is the polars dataframe containing extracted PhEval result requirements
    sort_order=SortOrder.DESCENDING,  # or can be ASCENDING - this determines in which order the scores will be ranked
    output_dir=output_directory,  # this can be accessed from the runner instance e.g., self.output_dir
    result_path=result_path  # this is the path to the tool-specific raw results file
    phenopacket_dir=phenopacket_dir # this is the path to the directory containing the phenopackets
)
```

#### Adding metadata to the results.yml

By default, PhEval will write a `results.yml` to the output directory supplied on the CLI. 

The `results.yml` contains basic metadata regarding the run configuration, however, there is also the option to add customised run metadata to the `results.yml` in the `tool_specific_configuration_options` field.

To achieve this, you'll need to create a `construct_meta_data()` method within your runner implementation. This method is responsible for appending customised metadata to the metadata object in the form of a defined dataclass. It should return the entire metadata object once the addition is completed.

e.g.,

_Defined customised metadata dataclass:_

```python
from dataclasses import dataclass

@dataclass
class CustomisedMetaData:
    customised_field: str
```

_Example of implementation in the runner._

```python
from dataclasses import dataclass
from pheval.runners.runner import PhEvalRunner
from pathlib import Path

@dataclass
class CustomPhevalRunner(PhEvalRunner):
    """CustomPhevalRunner Class."""

    input_dir: Path
    testdata_dir: Path
    tmp_dir: Path
    output_dir: Path
    config_file: Path
    version: str

    def prepare(self):
        """prepare method."""
        print("preparing")

    def run(self):
        """run method."""
        print("running with custom pheval runner")

    def post_process(self):
        """post_process method."""
        print("post processing")
        
    def construct_meta_data(self):
        """Add metadata."""
        self.meta_data.tool_specific_configuration_options = CustomisedMetaData(customised_field="customised_value")
        return self.meta_data

```

### 6. Test it.

To update your custom pheval runner implementation, you must first install the package

```
poetry install
```

Now you have to be able to run PhEval passing your custom runner as parameter. e.g.,

```
pheval run -i ./input_dir -t ./test_data_dir -r 'customphevalrunner' -o output_dir
```

The `-r` parameter stands for your plugin runner class name, and it must be entirely lowercase.

Output:

```
preparing
running
post processing
```

